# Project's checklist

## Purpose

Foster continuous improvement within sophilabs, by promoting a self-critical culture that thrives on
welcoming and adapting to change. To do so, the Squad operates through basic quality tools (such as
customized checklists), allowing each project a thorough process-alignment analysis against best
practices for specific knowledge-domains like Security, Software Design, Methodologies, etc.

Checklists are built on top of a simplified "Objectives & Key Results" approach, where expected
results align with best practices and are validated by specific questions. In consequence, deviated
results are visible and suggested action plans can be assessed and implemented.

E.g.: "Does every team (and team member) subscribe to Agile management practices? - Assistance can
be requested from the Agile Master to assess the team's knowledge gaps and implement Agile awareness
workshops"

## Kick-off

### General

- Do you have a project Manifesto or README?
  - Include a file in your project to help to newcomers so they can start working without
  inconvenience. Take a look at [Kick Off section](./kick-off/README.md) to get a sample.

## Security Checklist

### Server Configuration

- Are you actively applying security patches?
  - Apply security patch in your applications is important to reduce
    vulnerabilities. If you want to know more about security patches you
    can take a look at [Patches section](./security/README.md#security-patches).
- Do you have SSH configured with a password and without root login?
  - Configure SSH properly on your servers is important to reduce
    vulnerabilities. You can check how to do this in the [SSH
    section](./security/README.md#SSH).
- Are you using only version 2 of SSH protocol?
  - Use last version of SSH protocol is safer. For more information
    check [SSH section](./security/README.md#SSH).
- Are you using HTTPS everywhere?
  - Use HTTPS protocol is import to build safe web apps. If you don't
    know how to configure it take a look at [HTTPS
    Guidelines](./security/README.md#https).
- Are you using HSTS?
  - HSTS helps your site to enforce SSL/TLS usage for your users, so you can prevent
    protocol downgrade attacks and cookie hijacking.
    If you don't know how to configure it take a look at [HSTS Guidelines](./security/README.md#hsts).
- Are you whitelisting database connections?
  - Whitelisting database connections is important to protect your data.
    You can learn how to do this reading the [Security Database
    Section](./security/README.md#database-security).

### Identity and Access Management (IAM)

- Are you limiting the login attempts in your app?
  - Limiting the login attempts in your apps is important. Take a look
    to [Login Section](./security/README.md#login)
- Do you create users with autogenerated passwords instead of predefined ones?
  - Create autogenerated passwords prevents impersonation. Read the
    [Password Section](./security/README.md#passwords) to learn more.
- Are users the only ones that know their password every time?
  - For the same reason that checklist before, take a look at [Password
    Section](./security/README.md#passwords).
- Do you store passwords with a proper cryptographic hashing algorithm?
  - Store passwords in a secure way is important. If you want to learn
    about secure ways to store your passwords read [Password
    Section](./security/README.md#passwords).
- Do your app sessions/tokens expire?
  - Manage your sessions in a secure way is fundamental. Recommendations
    on how to manage sessions can be found in [Session
    Section](./security/README.md#passwords).
- Are you rejecting invalid data on every input?
  - Validate input data is important to prevent SQL injections attacks
    for example.

### Security in Development

- Does your team restrict development servers connection to be from localhost?
  - Ensure security in development environments is also important, you
    can take a look at [Server security](./security/README.md#server-security).
- Does your team use a system to store and/or share passwords?
  - To have a Secure Password managment is very important. You can read our recomendations in
  [Store and share passwords](./security/README.md#store-and-share-passwords) section.
- Does your team use password protected SSH keys to access development servers?
  - Configure SSH properly on your servers is important to reduce
    vulnerabilities (also in development). You can check how to do this in the [SSH
    section](./security/README.md#SSH).

## Testing Checklist

### Unit Test

- Are you actively writing and running unit tests in your project?
  - Write unit test in important to validate your programs and avoid introduce bugs in future
    releases. Examples of how to write unit tests [Unit testing](./testing/README.md#unit-testing).
- Are you actively writing and running load tests in your project?
  - Load tests are important to ensure good performance in your application. You can learn about it
  in [Load Testing](./testing/README.md#load-and-performance-testing).

### Coverage

- Are you actively measuring your code coverage?
  - Measure your coverage let you check the parts of the code that are
    covered with tests. There are several options depending on your
    technology stack, you can found some in the [Unit testing](./testing/README.md#unit-testing).
- Do you run code coverage measurements automatically for each merge request?
  - Execute testing tasks in your continuous integration progress is a
    way to detect bugs previous make a release. Take a look at [Testing](./testing/README.md)
    to know the available kinds of test that you can execute.

### Testing in CI

- Do you prevent merging pull requests (or building) if team-defined
  criteria are not met? (For example, coverage percentage below 90%)
  - Execute testing tasks and check coverage before merging pulls avoids introducing new pieces of
    code without testing. Take a look at [Testing](./testing/README.md) to know the available kinds
    of test that you can execute.
- Do you run tests automatically in each merge request and prevent merging (or building) if they
  fail?
  - Execute testing tasks before merging pulls requests helps you detect bugs previous deploy.
    Take a look at [Testing](./testing/README.md) to know the available kinds of test that you can execute.
- Did you write your testing setup in the *manifiesto file* and are actively updating it?
  - Have a testing section in your manifesto makes easier add new developers to the project.

## Deployment Checklist

### General

- Are you using a version control system (VCS)?
  - Using a version control system is important to keep control of the changes in your code.
    To get more information take a look at [VCS](./deployment/README.md#version-control-system).
- Are you using a containerization or virtualization system?
  - In order to improve project flexibility and portability we recommend
    using a containerization system. Take a look at
    [Containerization](./infrastructure/README.md#containerization).
- Are you using continuous integration (CI)?
  - Using continuos integration helps you the deployments tasks. To learn more take a look at
    [CI](./deployment/README.md#continuous-integration).
- Are you using a staging server for development branch releases?
  - Set up a staging server to improve the project visibility and the
    development process.
- Does your project have a rollback plan?
  - Rollback plans are important to ensure availability.
- Is the deployment process well documented in the *manifiesto file*?
  - Have a deployment section in your manifesto makes easier add new developers to the project.

## Software Design Checklist

### General

- Has the project documentation?
  - Each project should have documentation that helps to understand
    better the architecture. For example:
    - [High-level design](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/High-level_design)
    - [Class Diagram](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Class_diagram)
    - [Entity relationship model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Entity%E2%80%93relationship_model)

## Code Analysis Checklist

### Code Style

- Does the authored code in the project comply with the respective code style guidelines? (This
  excludes third-party code).
  - You can take a look at our [Code Analysis Guidelines](./code-analysis/README.md) to find ways of
  verify the code style in your project.
- Do commit messages follow a defined format respected by all team members?
  - You can take a look at our [commit hooks section](./code-analysis/README.md#commit-hooks) to learn
  how to verify yours commit messages.
- Does the project have an automatic way to verify the compliance of code guidelines and commit
  messages?
  - You can take a look at our [commit hooks section](./code-analysis/README.md#commit-hooks) to learn
  how to execute automatically these validations.

### Branching Strategy

- Does the project follow a clear branching/merging strategy?
  - Take a look to our [Branching Strategy section](./code-analysis/README.md#branching-strategy)
- Is the submitted code in the master branch reviewed by other team members before committing?
  - Take a look to our [Branching Strategy section](./code-analysis/README.md#branching-strategy)

### Documentation

- Does your project have documentation for new hires explaining the Tools needed for work and
  processes involved in the everyday work?
  - Take a look to our [Documentation section](./code-analysis/README.md#documentation)

## Methodologies Checklist

### Agile Framework

- Does your project use a defined agile framework?
  - Work with management, client and an agile coach to determine the
    best fit for your project. Projects in need of an adaptive approach
    would benefit from selecting a defined framework for easy adoption
    that helps it fulfill its goals.

### Development Team

- Does the team self-organize to tackle work?
  - Identify knowledge gaps within team's members.
  - Aid less knowledgeable or new team members to get trained appropriately.
  - Adopt implementation of workshops (either for technical or management knowledge gaps removal).
- Is the team cross-functional?
  - Perform team dynamics to identify the reasons why there's role-lock
  - Propose distributed workload adoption and internal coaching on teams, so they're able to even
    out gaps locking members into specific roles.
- Is "Definition of Done" (DoD) agreed by all?
  - If exists but unclear (or not visible to all) make sure to refine it and make it visible to the
    whole team.
    - Schedule a session with a dynamic aid for PO and dev team to agree on a clear Definition of
      Done.
- Does the team respect DoD?
  - Meet with the dev team to assess the reason behind DoD non-compliance. Include PO in dynamics
    when required to realign both parties.
- Are all team members co-located?
  - Implement "work team co-location" of development teams and all core roles as a mandatory policy.
- Have distributed teams clear communication rules?
  - When not possible (distributed teams), have all team members agree on a common working schedule
    and appropriate communication channels.

### Agile Coach

- Is there an Agile Master?
  - Work with management, PO & client/stakeholders to appoint an appropriate agile master
- Does the team comply with agile practices & processes?
  - Ask agile master to engage in the team's activities; agile master should focus on inspecting how
    work is done and identifying areas for improvement.
    - Make sure the agile master is appropriately trained and seasoned in agile practices.
- Does the team help to achieve goals by removing impediments?
  - The agile master should be invested with the team and participate in team's ceremonies as much
    as possible; this enables impediments recognition and action plans
- Does the Agile Master protect the team?
  - Teams should be wary and vigilant of their own limits, but it's always a good idea to ask the
    agile master for feedback about commitment vs. capacity gaps management.
    - Ask the agile master for help assessing the team's delivery capacity vs. commitments and
      making suggestions about it.

### Business/Customer Representative

- Is there a clearly defined "Product Owner" (PO)?
  - Negotiate with management and clients/stakeholders to appoint a PO aligned with the required
    attributes to successfully fulfill the role.
- Is the PO empowered to prioritize?
  - Negotiate the clients/stakeholders acknowledgment empowering the
    PO to be the "Voice of the Customer".
    Aid PO in acknowledging its faculty to prioritize, empower the
    role and follow its direction.
- Has the PO enough knowledge to prioritize tasks?
  - Make sure that clients/stakeholders appoint the appropriate
    person (vastly knowledgeable of the product at hand) to perform
    the PO role.
    - If not possible, work with PO and stakeholders so they fill in
      product-related knowledge gaps.
- Has the PO direct contact with dev team?
  - Always agree with PO as to which communication channels will be
    used and if segmentation by priority will be established.
  - Make sure PO commits to being available to dev team when needed.
- Has the PO direct contact with stakeholders?
  - Constantly ask the PO to provide opinions, impressions and
    feedback from the stakeholder's point of view; if PO is unable
    to do so, urge PO to reach out to stakeholders and grasp their
    vision
- Does the PO speak in "one voice"?
  - Ask PO to work in ordering stakeholder's ideas or requirements
    in means of priority and features, rather than simply including
    them as they come in.
  - In situations were several PO's are being catered, convene with
    all of them there's an unified front on their side and no
    conflicting prioritization or requests are made
- Does the PO provide a clear product direction/ short-term goals?
  - Ask the PO to confirm the strategic goal for the product as a
    whole. Always match how the dev team's current efforts add
    towards reaching that goal.
    - If unknown, ask PO to address this with the stakeholder's
      community and organizational leadership
    - In lower-level goals, such as a sprint goal, Ask the PO to be
      specific as possible about.
- Is the PO the only owner of the "Product Backlog" (PBL)?
  - If there's a PBL but the PO doesn't "own" it, meet with PO to
    discuss the PBL importance and obtain: PO's acknowledgment of
    the PBL's value (and risks of not having one), plus PO's
    commitment to PBL ownership and maintenance
  - If there's no PBL, ask your agile master to aid PO in
    consolidating it (dev team can also participate if needed).
- Does the PO delegate PBL management to another person?
  - Best case scenario consists in trying to influence the PO to not
    delegate this essential function, discuss the PBL's importance
    and the risks of not actively engaging its management
    - In any other case, ask your agile master to aid PBL delegates in
      actively and appropriately managing it

### Product Feature List (i.e. PBL)

- Does the PBL exist?
  - If there's no PBL, ask your agile master to aid PO in
    consolidating it (dev team can also participate if needed).
- Does the PO/delegate maintain the PBL?
  - Ask your agile coach to meet with the PO/delegates to discuss
    the importance of actively managing the PBL; failure to do so
    can harshly constraint the product development.
- Does the PO prioritize top items by business value?
  - Discuss with PO about the importance of prioritization and how
    it relates to the product's vision and goals
    - If needed, conduct a workshop with PO & stakeholders (product
      community) to draft priorities appropriately.
- Are the PBL's top items refined enough?
  - Work with PO in further refining epics and huge stories: discuss
    dev team's overall capacity and importance of PBI's fitting
    iterations
- Are the PBL's top estimated by the team?
  - Make sure the PO is constantly grooming the PBL (if not, make
    clear to PO the value in doing so).
  - Work with PO and dev team so they cyclically conduct PBL
    grooming sessions.
- Does the PO endorse all PBL items?
  - Make sure the PO is constantly grooming the PBL (if not, make
    clear to PO the value of doing so)
  - Discuss with PO the benefits of keeping a lean PBL: suggest
    constant grooming and removal of items no longer needed.

### Time-Boxing

- Has each iteration a max length of 2 weeks?
  - Identify (team discussion) reasons why dev team can't commit to
    a fixed sprint.
  - Suggest framework adjustments where applicable.
- Is not the dev team disrupted/controlled by outsiders?
  - Identify external (to the dev team) parties that might be
    disrupting dev team's work
  - Engage them to discuss active sprint working rules, agree on
    establishing priority according needs to reach out to the dev
    team
- Does the team deliver what they commit to?
  - Retrospect with the dev team about it. Focus dynamics on
   isolating reasons for the team not delivering to commitment.
    Work out action plans to resolve by next iteration
- Does the team always end on time?
  - Identify (team discussion) occurrences and reasons why sprint
    might not be ending on time
  - Upon findings, work with dev team towards aiding situation.

### Workflow Management

- Is the Workflow controlled in a Kanban Board?
  - Ask the agile master to coach the team in implementing a work
    visualization board (such as a Kanban/Scrum board); this fosters
    transparency and ownership amongst team members
- Does the board's workflow match the team's actual process?
  - Ask your agile master to help the team map their actual process
    workflow to make sure it's appropriately outlined in the visual
    work-board; techniques such as Value-stream mapping can help
    fulfill this task
- Does the team identify idle times and know its lead time?
  - Ask your agile master to help the team determine how much time
    does the time take from the moment a requirement is received
    until it is fulfilled (lead time). Also, determine where the
    idle times lay (moments when parts of the team do nothing
    because of dependencies)
  - Techniques such as developing a Value-stream map can also help
    teams determine these factors and help take advantage of them
- Are bottlenecks recognized & WIP limits in place to address them?
  - Aid dev team in analyzing Kanban Board and focusing on work
    items that are blocked or have been opened for longer than
    normal time. Identify workflow phases where there's too much
    work clutter.
  - Suggest to a dev team already recognizing bottlenecks and
    blockage, means to aid them: implement WIP limits.
- Is the work progress updated daily?
  - Teams should strive to inspect and adapt as frequently as
    possible to make sure they're delivering value; so team members
    should commit to actively managing work through the workflow
    during their workday.
- Does the team deliver on an agreed deadline?
  - Retrospect with the dev team about it. Focus dynamics on
    isolating reasons for the team not delivering to commitment.
    Work out action plans to resolve by next iteration.

### Planning

- Has the team planning sessions?
  - Urge team members to conduct planning sessions, even if this
    means small and informal ones. Teams must frequently align
    amongst themselves to check dependencies, brainstorm over
    impediments and work together towards their common goal.
- Are the planning sessions weekly?
  - It's a good practice to have many levels of planning: successful
    teams usually have one big/formal planning session that's
    followed up by smaller/informal ad-hoc sessions, or make use of
    daily stand-ups or such to make sure plans are in check.
- Is there a formal planning session with the PO once per iteration?
  - Urge the team to at least have one big/formal planning session
    that makes sense for a fair amount of work during a specified
    timeframe.
  - Remind them that successful teams meet of then to inspect and
    adapt, which is, in other words, conducting some sort of
    planning.
  - Engage PO over the importance of partaking in planning sessions:
    PO's ability to prioritize, clear up doubts and provide
    direction is paramount while planning. Urge him to participate
    at least of the most top-level/strategic planning sessions.
    Failure to do so might result in the delivery of work not
    required or not valuable to the client.
    - It's also a good practice to include the PO in as many planning
      instances as it makes sense and time/responsibilities
      constraints permit.
- Does the PO maintain the PBL up-to-date?
  - Always touch base with PO about how a properly groomed PBL eases
    planning sessions.
  - If needed, work dynamics to help the PO groom the PBL
    appropriately.
- Does the whole dev team participate in planning sessions?
  - Engage dev team members and make sure they understand how
    planning sessions ease their work. Encourage them to always
    participate and make the most out of it.
- Is the PO satisfied with priorities and scope of work?
  - Ask PO/delegates about their individual impressions of
    disconformity with the plan, then help them achieve an
    agreement.
- Is the whole team satisfied with agreed work plan?
  - Ask the dev team about their individual impressions of
    disconformity with the plan, then help them achieve an
    agreement.
- Has each iteration a goal?
  - Make sure an appropriate goal was set for the sprint or
    milestone; all work items within should be aligned with it and
    completely clear to the dev team; otherwise, the team should
    meet to realign these points.
  - In case of different opinions about setting goals and their
    acceptance (either from the business side or the dev team), ask
    your agile coach to mediate to try and reach a consensus.

### Milestones (e.g. Sprint BL , Work Plans)

- Is the work plan highly visible?
  - Make the work plan visible to all: either by a physical board
    (including burndown chart and/or any other useful artifact),
    and/or with work tracking systems (such as Jira).
- Is the work progress updated daily?
  - Discuss the importance of work progress tracking with the dev
    team, encourage them to always reflect their progress (or lack
    thereof).
- Is the work plan owned exclusively by dev team?
  - Make it visible to all that the work plan belongs to the dev
    team: any tampering with it requires dev team's acknowledgement
    & approval.
  - Engage all other roles and stakeholders to acknowledge the work
    plan's ownership condition: suggest focus on PBL for future work
    alignment.

### Stand-ups

- Does the "Stand-ups" occur at least once a day?
  - Suggest dev team to set aside some minutes each day to inspect
    as a group what they've worked on and what they plan to work in.
  - Successful teams conduct stand-ups at least once a day, at the
    same place and time, urge your team to adopt this practice.
  - Suggest the dev team to make good use of their stand-ups: a good
    starting point is to review the team's due goal and inspect the
    work they're doing towards achieving it.
  - Ask team members to try and save problems/impediments analysis
    for a separate session with other involved parties. To keep
    stand-ups lean, urge them to focus on collectively reviewing
    their current work and yielding short-term plans from it
- Has the Dev team the ability to organize to solve
  problems/impediments?
  - Encourage the dev team to swarm towards solutions as a unit,
    keeping in mind proper distribution.
  - Encourage the dev team to bring up impediments on daily
    stand-ups, this inspection will foster team solutions
  - Ask the dev team how they usually organize their daily work, ask
    dev team if they are aware of what their peers are working in
    (and if their work doesn't collide)

### Demo/Reviews

- Has the team demo/review sessions with the PO?
  - Discuss with PO and dev team reasons behind not having frequent
    product increment demos.
  - Urge your PO to participate in demos. PO role is central to this
    instance and helps the team keep track and realign with business
    strategic goals, as well receiving feedback helpful for that
    purpose.
  - Retrospect with the dev team about it. Focus dynamics on
    isolating reasons for the team not delivering the required
    quality.
  - Ask the PO: How would you rate this iteration's result, on a
    scale from 1 to 10?- In your opinion, what's missing to obtain a
    perfect score?

### Retrospecting

- Has the team retrospectives frequently?
  - Encourage dev team to partake in a session dedicated to reflect
    on performance and lessons learned, aiming to yield small,
    incremental improvements.
  - Successful teams have a retrospective session at the very end of
    every work cycle. This guarantees teams don't lose grasp of
    valuable happenings, good or bad (and their learning of it);
    allowing collective inspection and implementing improvements
    before the next work cycle.
  - Tweak retrospective dynamics used with the dev team to obtain
    appropriate feedback, and coach them on defining SMART goals for
    short-term increments of improvement.
  - Remind teams to always review past action plans at the beginning
    of each Retrospective and to track their completion to guarantee
    improvement.

[vinagecr]: http://vintage.agency/blog/how-to-implement-code-review-process-in-a-web-development-team/