Project's checklist
-------------------

Purpose
=======

Foster continuous improvement within sophilabs, by promoting a self-critical
culture that thrives on welcoming and adapting to change.
To do so, the Squad operates through basic quality tools (such as customized
checklists), allowing each project a thorough process-alignment analysis against
best practices for specific knowledge-domains like Security, Software Design,
Methodologies, etc.

Checklists are built on top of a simplified "Objectives & Key Results"
approach, where expected results align with best practices and are validated by
specific questions. In consequence, deviated results are visible and suggested
action plans can be assessed and implemented.

E.g.: "Does every team (and team member) subscribe to Agile management
practices? - Assistance can be requested from the Agile Master to assess
the team's knowledge gaps and implement Agile awareness workshops"


Security Checklist
==================

- Are you actively applying security patches?

  Apply security patch in your applications is important to reduce
  vulnerabilities. If you want to know more about security patches you can
  take a look at `Patches section <./security/patches.rst>`_.

- Do you have SSH configured with a password and without root login?

  Configure SSH properly on your servers is important to reduce
  vulnerabilities. You can check how to do this in the `SSH section
  <./security/server.rst#SSH>`_.

- Are you using only version 2 of SSH protocol?

  Use last version of SSH protocol is safer. For more information check
  `SSH section <./security/server.rst#SSH>`-.

- Are you using HTTPS everywhere?

  Use HTTPS protocol is import to build safe web apps. If you don't know
  how to configure it take a look at `HTTPS Guidelines
  <./security/server.rst#https>`_.

- Are you using HSTS?

  TBD: Explain importance of HSTS
  If you don't know how to configure it take a look at
  `HSTS Guidelines <./security/server.rst#hsts>`_

- Are you whitelisting database connections?

  Whitelisting database connections is important to protect your data.
  You can learn how to do this reading `Database Guidelines
  <./security/server.rst#database>`_

- Are you limiting the login attempts in your app?

  Limiting the login attempts in your apps is important. Take a look to
  `Login Section <./security/user-management.rst#login>`_

- Do you create users with autogenerated passwords instead of predefined ones?

  Create autogenerated passwords prevents impersonation. Read the
  `Password Section <./security/user-management.rst#password>`_ to
  learn more.

- Are users the only ones that know their password every time?

  For the same reason that checklist before, take a look at
  `Password Section <./security/user-management.rst#password>`_.

- Do you store passwords with a proper cryptographic hashing algorithm?

  Store passwords in a secure way is important. If you want to learn about
  secure ways to store your passwords read
  `Password Section <./security/user-management.rst#password>`_.

- Do your app sessions/tokens expire?

  Manage your sessions in a secure way is fundamental. Recommendations
  on how to manage sessions can be found in `Session Section
  <./security/user-management.rst#password>`_.

- Are you rejecting invalid data on every input?

  Validate input data is important to prevent SQL injections attacks
  for example.

- Does your team restrict development servers connection to be from localhost?

  Ensure security in development environments is also important, you
  can take a look at
  `Security in development section <./security/development.rst>`_.

- Does your team use a system to generate and/or share passwords?

  For the same reason that checklist before, take a look at
  `Security in development section <./security/development.rst>`_.

- Does your team use password protected SSH keys to access servers?

  For the same reason that checklist before, take a look to
  `Security in development section <./security/development.rst>`_.


Testing Checklist
=================

- Are you actively writing and running unit tests in your project?

  Write unit test in important to validate your programs and avoid
  introduce bugs in future releases. Examples of how to write unit
  testes can be found in
  `Django unit test
  <./testing/automated/frameworks-and-libraries/django/README.rst>`_ and
  `React unit test
  <./testing/automated/frameworks-and-libraries/react/README.rst>`_.

- Are you actively writing and running load tests in your project?

  Load tests are important to measure the performance of your application.
  A used tool to implement load tests is `Apache's JMeter
  <https://jmeter.apache.org/>`_.

- Are you actively measuring your code coverage?

  Measure your coverage let you check the parts of the code that are
  covered with tests. There are several options depending on your technology
  stack, you can found some in the `Coverage section <./testing/coverage.rst>`_

- Do you run code coverage measurements automatically for each merge request?

  Execute testing tasks in your continuous integration progress is a way to
  detect bugs previous make a release. To know more take a look at
  `Testing in CI <./testing/continuous-integration.rst>`_

- Do you prevent merging pull requests (or building) if team-defined criteria
  are not met? (For example, coverage percentage below 90%)

  See previous suggestion.

- Do you run tests automatically in each merge request and prevent
  merging (or building) if they fail?

  See previous suggestion.

- Did you write your testing setup in the *manifiesto file* and are
  actively updating it?

  Have a testing section in your manifesto makes easier add new developers to
  the project.

Deployment Checklist
====================

- Are you using a version control system?

  Every project must use a VCS. `Git <https://git-scm.com>`_ is our preferred
  VCS. We use `GitHub <https://github.com>`_ for open-source projects and
  `GitLab <https://gitlab.com>`_ for proprietary projects.

- Are you using a containerization or virtualization system?

  In order to improve the project flexibility and portability we recommend
  using  `Docker <https://www.docker.com>`_.

- Are you using continuous integration?

  A continuous integration service eases the development workflow by
  automating tasks such as testing and deployment.
  Please take a look at
  `GitLab CI <https://about.gitlab.com/features/gitlab-ci-cd/>`_ and
  `Jenkins <https://jenkins.io>`_.

- Are you using a staging server for development branch releases?

  Set up a staging server to improve the project visibility and the development
  process.

- Does your project have a rollback plan?

  Rollback plans are important to ensure availability.

- Is the deployment process well documented in the *manifiesto file*?

  Have a deployment section in your manifesto makes easier add new developers to
  the project.

Software Design Checklist
=========================

- Has the project documentation?

  Each project should have documentation that helps to understand better the
  architecture. For example:
    - `High-level design <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/High-level_design>`__
    - `Class Diagram <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Class_diagram>`__
    - `Entity relationship model
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Entity%E2%80%93relationship_model>`__

Code Analysis Checklist
=======================

- Does the authored code in the project comply with the respective code
style guidelines? (This excludes third-party code).

  You can use linters tool to verify code style guidelines.
  If you are in doubt about which tool you should use, refer to each language
  guidelines page. e.g:
  - `Javascript <./programming/languages/javascript/README.rst>`_
  - `Python <./programming/languages/python/README.rst>`_
  - `Sass <./programming/languages/sass/README.rst>`_

- Do commit messages follow a defined format respected by all team members?

  You could define Commit Message guidelines. For example
  ``/#\d+: [A-Z](\w|\s)*/`` (i.e. #555: Fix typo in guideline).
  You may find this `article <https://chris.beams.io/posts/git-commit/>`_
  useful.

- Does the project have an automatic way to verify the compliance of code
guidelines and commit messages?

  You can use commit hooks to verify the code style guidelines and the commit
  message by overriding the following files ``.git/hooks/pre-commit`` and
  ``.git/hooks/commit-msg`` respectively.
  Check out this `article <https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/git-hooks>`_
  to learn more about Git hooks.

- Does the project follow a clear branching/merging strategy?

  You can follow `Git Flow
  <https://danielkummer.github.io/git-flow-cheatsheet/>`_
  Recommended strategies:
  - Having the master branch (or the equivalent) protected, meaning all commits
  must be merged from feature branches.
  - Ensuring every commit must be made inside a particular branch that
  encapsulate that particular task.


- Is the submitted code in the master branch reviewed by other team members
before committing?

  You can implement Code Reviews, which is a practice to ensure code quality
  and attachment to the `guidelines
  <http://vintage.agency/blog/how-to-implement-code-review-process-in-a-web-development-team/>`__.

  As a rule of thumb:

    - Code reviews must be enforced before merging code to the master branch.
    - Code reviews should follow the `guidelines <./programming/code-reviews.rst>`_.

- Does your project have documentation for new hires explaining the Tools needed
for work and processes involved in the everyday work?

  You should consider having a
  `README <https://gist.github.com/PurpleBooth/109311bb0361f32d87a2>`_
  and a `Contributing <https://gist.github.com/PurpleBooth/b24679402957c63ec426>`_
  guidelines file in the root of your project. Those files can include:

    - Development tools: Text editors, IDEs, Plugins.
    - Required environment files.
    - Procedures for installing Hooks.
    - Naming conventions.
    - Common design patterns used in the code.


Methodologies Checklist
=======================

- Does your project use a defined agile framework?

  Work with management, client and an agile coach to determine the best fit for
  your project.
  Projects in need of an adaptive approach would benefit from selecting a
  defined framework for easy adoption that helps it fulfill its goals.

- Does the team self-organize to tackle work?

  - Identify knowledge gaps within team's members.
  - Aid less knowledgeable or new team members to get trained appropriately.
  - Adopt implementation of workshops (either for technical or management
  knowledge gaps removal).


- Is the team cross-functional?

  - Perform team dynamics to identify the reasons why there's role-lock
  - Propose distributed workload adoption and internal coaching on teams, so
  they're able to even out gaps locking members into specific roles.


- Is "Definition of Done" (DoD) agreed by all?

  - If exists but unclear (or not visible to all) make sure to refine it and
  make it visible to the whole team.
  - Schedule a session with a dynamic aid for PO and dev team to agree on a
  clear Definition of Done.

- Does the team respect DoD?

  Meet with the dev team to assess the reason behind DoD non-compliance.
  Include PO in dynamics when required to realign both parties.

- Are all team members co-located?

 Implement "work team co-location" of development teams and all core roles as a
 mandatory policy.

- Have distributed teams clear communication rules?

  When not possible (distributed teams), have all team members agree on a
  common working schedule and appropriate communication channels.

- Is there an Agile Master?

  Work with management, PO & client/stakeholders to appoint an appropriate agile
   master

- Does the team comply with agile practices & processes?

  - Ask agile master to engage in the team's activities; agile master should
  focus on inspecting how work is done and identifying areas for improvement.
  - Make sure the agile master is appropriately trained and seasoned in agile
  practices.


- Does the team help to achieve goals by removing impediments?

  The agile master should be invested with the team and participate in team's
  ceremonies as much as possible; this enables impediments recognition and
  action plans

- Does the Agile Master protect the team?

  - Teams should be wary and vigilant of their own limits, but it's always a
  good idea to ask the agile master for feedback about commitment vs. capacity
  gaps management.
  - Ask the agile master for help assessing the team's delivery capacity vs.
  commitments and making suggestions about it.


- Is there a clearly defined "Product Owner" (PO)?

  Negotiate with management and clients/stakeholders to appoint a PO aligned
  with the required attributes to successfully fulfill the role.

- Is the PO empowered to prioritize?

  - Negotiate the clients/stakeholders acknowledgment empowering the PO to be
  the "Voice of the Customer".
  - Aid PO in acknowledging its faculty to prioritize, empower the role and
  follow its direction.


- Has the PO enough knowledge to prioritize tasks?

  - Make sure that clients/stakeholders appoint the appropriate person (vastly
  knowledgeable of the product at hand) to perform the PO role.
  - If not possible, work with PO and stakeholders so they fill in
  product-related knowledge gaps.


- Has the PO direct contact with dev team?

  - Always agree with PO as to which communication channels will be used and if
  segmentation by priority will be established.
  - Make sure PO commits to being available to dev team when needed.


- Has the PO direct contact with stakeholders?

  - Constantly ask the PO to provide opinions, impressions and feedback from
  the stakeholder's point of view; if PO is unable to do so, urge PO to reach
  out to stakeholders and grasp their vision


- Does the PO speak in "one voice"?

  - Ask PO to work in ordering stakeholder's ideas or requirements in means of
  priority and features, rather than simply including them as they come in.
  - In situations were several PO's are being catered, convene with all of them
  there's an unified front on their side and no conflicting prioritization or requests are made


- Does the PO provide a clear product direction/ short-term goals?

  - Ask the PO to confirm the strategic goal for the product as a whole.
  Always match how the dev team's current efforts add towards reaching that
  goal.
  - If unknown, ask PO to address this with the stakeholder's community and
  organizational leadership
  - In lower-level goals, such as a sprint goal, Ask the PO to be specific as
  possible about.


- Is the PO the only owner of the "Product Backlog" (PBL)?

  - If there's a PBL but the PO doesn't "own" it, meet with PO to discuss the
  PBL importance and obtain: PO's acknowledgment of the PBL's value (and risks
  of not having one), plus PO's commitment to PBL ownership and maintenance
  - If there's no PBL, ask your agile master to aid PO in consolidating it
  (dev team can also participate if needed).


- Does the PO delegate PBL management to another person?

  - Best case scenario consists in trying to influence the PO to not delegate
  this essential function, discuss the PBL's importance and the risks of not
  actively engaging its management
  - In any other case, ask your agile master to aid PBL delegates in actively
  and appropriately managing it


- Does the PBL exist?

  - If there's no PBL, ask your agile master to aid PO in consolidating it
  (dev team can also participate if needed).


- Does the PO/delegate maintain the PBL?

  - Ask your agile coach to meet with the PO/delegates to discuss the importance
  of actively managing the PBL; failure to do so can harshly constraint the
  product development.


- Does the PO prioritize top items by business value?

  - Discuss with PO about the importance of prioritization and how it relates
  to the product's vision and goals
  - If needed, conduct a workshop with PO & stakeholders (product community) to
  draft priorities appropriately.

- Are the PBL's top items refined enough?

  - Work with PO in further refining epics and huge stories: discuss dev team's
  overall capacity and importance of PBI's fitting iterations


- Are the PBL's top estimated by the team?

 - Make sure the PO is constantly grooming the PBL (if not, make clear to PO
 the value in doing so).
 - Work with PO and dev team so they cyclically conduct PBL grooming sessions.


- Does the PO endorse all PBL items?

  - Make sure the PO is constantly grooming the PBL (if not, make clear to PO
  the value of doing so)
  - Discuss with PO the benefits of keeping a lean PBL: suggest constant
  grooming and removal of items no longer needed.


- Has each iteration a max length of 2 weeks?

  - Identify (team discussion) reasons why dev team can't commit to a fixed
  sprint.
  - Suggest framework adjustments where applicable.


- Is not the dev team disrupted/controlled by outsiders?

  - Identify external (to the dev team) parties that might be disrupting dev
  team's work
  - Engage them to discuss active sprint working rules, agree on establishing
  priority according needs to reach out to the dev team


- Does the team deliver what they commit to?

  - Retrospect with the dev team about it. Focus dynamics on isolating reasons
  for the team not delivering to commitment. Work out action plans to resolve by next iteration


- Does the team always end on time?

  - Identify (team discussion) occurrences and reasons why sprint might not be
  ending on time
  - Upon findings, work with dev team towards aiding situation.


- Is the Workflow controlled in a Kanban Board?

  - Ask the agile master to coach the team in implementing a work visualization
  board (such as a Kanban/Scrum board); this fosters transparency and ownership
  amongst team members


- Does the board's workflow match the team's actual process?

  - Ask your agile master to help the team map their actual process workflow
  to make sure it's appropriately outlined in the visual work-board; techniques
  such as Value-stream mapping can help fulfill this task


- Does the team identify idle times and know its lead time?

  - Ask your agile master to help the team determine how much time does the
  time take from the moment a requirement is received until it is fulfilled
  (lead time). Also, determine where the idle times lay (moments when parts of
  the team do nothing because of dependencies)
  - Techniques such as developing a Value-stream map can also help teams
  determine these factors and help take advantage of them


- Are bottlenecks recognized & WIP limits in place to address them?

  - Aid dev team in analyzing Kanban Board and focusing on work items that are
  blocked or have been opened for longer than normal time. Identify workflow
  phases where there's too much work clutter.
  - Suggest to a dev team already recognizing bottlenecks and blockage, means
  to aid them: implement WIP limits.


- Is the work progress updated daily?

  - Teams should strive to inspect and adapt as frequently as possible to make
  sure they're delivering value; so team members should commit to actively
  managing work through the workflow during their workday.


- Does the team deliver on an agreed deadline?

  - Retrospect with the dev team about it. Focus dynamics on isolating reasons
   for the team not delivering to commitment. Work out action plans to resolve
   by next iteration.


- Has the team planning sessions?

  - Urge team members to conduct planning sessions, even if this means small and
  informal ones. Teams must frequently align amongst themselves to check
  dependencies, brainstorm over impediments and work together towards their
  common goal.


- Are the planning sessions weekly?

  - It's a good practice to have many levels of planning: successful teams
  usually have one big/formal planning session that's followed up by
  smaller/informal ad-hoc sessions, or make use of daily stand-ups or such to
  make sure plans are in check.


- Is there a formal planning session with the PO once per iteration?

  - Urge the team to at least have one big/formal planning session that makes
  sense for a fair amount of work during a specified timeframe.
  - Remind them that successful teams meet of then to inspect and adapt,
  which is, in other words, conducting some sort of planning.
  - Engage PO over the importance of partaking in planning sessions: PO's
  ability to prioritize, clear up doubts and provide direction is paramount
  while planning. Urge him to participate at least of the most
  top-level/strategic planning sessions. Failure to do so might result in the
  delivery of work not required or not valuable to the client.
  - It's also a good practice to include the PO in as many planning instances
  as it makes sense and time/responsibilities constraints permit.


- Does the PO maintain the PBL up-to-date?

  - Always touch base with PO about how a properly groomed PBL eases planning
  sessions.
  - If needed, work dynamics to help the PO groom the PBL appropriately.


- Does the whole dev team participate in planning sessions?

  - Engage dev team members and make sure they understand how planning
  sessions ease their work. Encourage them to always participate and make the
  most out of it.


- Is the PO satisfied with priorities and scope of work?

  - Ask PO/delegates about their individual impressions of disconformity with
  the plan, then help them achieve an agreement.


- Is the whole team satisfied with agreed work plan?

  - Ask the dev team about their individual impressions of disconformity with
  the plan, then help them achieve an agreement.


- Has each iteration a goal?

  - Make sure an appropriate goal was set for the sprint or milestone; all
  work items within should be aligned with it and completely clear to the dev
  team; otherwise, the team should meet to realign these points.
  - In case of different opinions about setting goals and their acceptance
  (either from the business side or the dev team), ask your agile coach to
  mediate to try and reach a consensus.


- Is the work plan highly visible?

  - Make the work plan visible to all: either by a physical board (including
  burndown chart and/or any other useful artifact), and/or with work tracking
  systems (such as Jira).


- Is the work progress updated daily?

  - Discuss the importance of work progress tracking with the dev team,
  encourage them to always reflect their progress (or lack thereof).


- Is the work plan owned exclusively by dev team?

  - Make it visible to all that the work plan belongs to the dev team: any
  tampering with it requires dev team's acknowledgement & approval.
  - Engage all other roles and stakeholders to acknowledge the work plan's
  ownership condition: suggest focus on PBL for future work alignment.


- Does the "Stand-ups" occur at least once a day?

  - Suggest dev team to set aside some minutes each day to inspect as a group
  what they've worked on and what they plan to work in.
  - Successful teams conduct stand-ups at least once a day, at the same place
  and time, urge your team to adopt this practice.
  - Suggest the dev team to make good use of their stand-ups: a good starting
  point is to review the team's due goal and inspect the work they're doing
  towards achieving it.
  - Ask team members to try and save problems/impediments analysis for a
  separate session with other involved parties. To keep stand-ups lean, urge them to focus on collectively reviewing  their current work and yielding short-term plans from it


- Has the Dev team the ability to organize to solve problems/impediments?

  - Encourage the dev team to swarm towards solutions as a unit, keeping in
  mind proper distribution.
  - Encourage the dev team to bring up impediments on daily stand-ups, this
  inspection will foster team solutions
  - Ask the  dev team how they usually organize their daily work, ask dev team
  if they are aware of what their peers are working in (and if their work doesn't collide)


- Has the team demo/review sessions with the PO?

  - Discuss with PO and dev team reasons behind not having frequent product
  increment demos.
  - Urge your PO to participate in demos. PO role is central to this instance
  and helps the team keep track and realign with business strategic goals, as
  well receiving feedback helpful for that purpose.
  - Retrospect with the dev team about it. Focus dynamics on isolating reasons
  for the team not delivering the required quality.
  - Ask the PO: How would you rate this iteration's result, on a scale from 1
  to 10?- In your opinion, what's missing to obtain a perfect score?


- Has the team retrospectives frequently?

  - Encourage dev team to partake in a session dedicated to reflect on
  performance and lessons learned, aiming to yield small, incremental
  improvements.
  - Successful teams have a retrospective session at the very end of every work
  cycle. This guarantees teams don't lose grasp of valuable happenings, good or
  bad (and their learning of it); allowing collective inspection and
  implementing improvements before the next work cycle.
  - Tweak retrospective dynamics used with the dev team to obtain appropriate
  feedback, and coach them on defining SMART goals for short-term increments of
  improvement.
  - Remind teams to always review past action plans at the beginning of each
  Retrospective and to track their completion to guarantee improvement.
